hi I'm kianne and welcome to crash
course computer science so we've talked
a lot about sorting in this series and
often code to sort a list of numbers is
only 10 lines long which is pretty easy
for a single programmer to write plus
it's short enough that you don't need
any special tools you can do it in
notepad really but a sorting algorithm
isn't a program it's likely only a small
part of a much larger program for
example Microsoft Office has roughly 40
million lines of code 40 million that's
way too big for any one person to figure
out and write to build huge programs
like this programmers use a set of tools
and practices taken together these form
the discipline of software engineering a
term coined by engineer Margaret
Hamilton who helped NASA prevent serious
problems on the Apollo 11 Mission To The
Moon she want explained it this way it's
kind of like a root canal you waited
till the end but there are things you
could have done beforehand it's like
preventative healthare but it's
preventative software
as I mentioned in episode 12 breaking
big programs into smaller functions
allows many people to work
simultaneously they don't have to worry
about the whole thing just the function
they're working on so if you're task
with writing a sort algorithm you only
need to make sure it sorts properly and
efficiently however even packing up code
into functions isn't enough Microsoft
Office probably contains hundreds of
thousands of them that's better than
dealing with 40 million lines of code
but it's still way too many things for
one person not te to manage the solution
is to package functions into hierarchies
pulling related code together into
objects for example cars software might
have several functions related to cruise
control like setting speed nudging speed
up or down and stopping cruise control
altogether since they're all related we
can wrap them up into a unified cruise
control object but we don't have to stop
there cruise control is just one part of
the engine software there might also be
sets of functions that control spark
plug ignition fuel pumps and the
radiator so we can create a parent
engine object object that contains all
of these children objects in addition to
Children objects the engine itself might
have its own functions you want to be
able to stop and start it for example
it'll also have its own variables like
how many miles the car has traveled in
general objects can contain other
objects functions and variables and of
course the engine is just one part of a
car object there's also the transmission
Wheels doors windows and so on now as a
programmer if I want to set the cruise
control I navigate down the object
hierarchy from the outermost objects to
more and more deeply nested ones if
eventually I reach the function I want
to trigger car then engine then cruise
control then set cruise speed to 55
programming languages often use
something equivalent to the syntax shown
here the idea of packing up functional
units into nested objects is called
objectoriented programming this is very
similar to what we've done all series
long HED complexity by encapsulating
low-level details in higher order
components before we packed up things
like transistor circuits into higher
level Boolean Gates now we're doing the
same thing with software yet again it's
a way to move move up a new level of
abstraction breaking up a big program
like a car's software into functional
units is perfect for teams one team
might be responsible for the cruise
control system and a single programmer
on that team tackles a handful of
functions this is similar to how big
physical things are built like
skyscrapers you'll have electricians
running wires plumbers fitting pipes
welders welding painters painting and
hundreds of other people teaming All
Over the Hole they work together on
different parts simultaneously
leveraging their different skills until
one day you've got a whole working
building but returning to our cruise
control example its code is going to
have to make use of functions in other
parts of the engine software to you know
keep the car at a constant speed that
code isn't part of the cruise control
team's responsibility it's another
team's code because the cruise control
team didn't write that they're going to
need good documentation about what each
function in the code does and a
well-defined application programming
interface or API for short you can think
of an API as the way that collaborating
programmers interact across various
parts of the code for example in the
ignition control object there might be
functions to set the RPM of the engine
check the spark plug voltage as well as
fire the individual spark plugs being
able to set the motor's RPM is really
useful the cruise control team is going
to need to call that function but they
don't know much about how the ignition
system works it's not a good idea to let
them call functions that fire the
individual spark plugs or the engine
might explode maybe the API allows the
right people access to the right
functions and data objectoriented
programming languages do this by letting
you specify whether functions are public
or private if a function is marked as
private it means only functions inside
that object can call it so in this
example only other functions inside of
ignition control like the set RPM
function can fire the spark plugs on the
other hand because the set RPM function
is marked as public other objects can
call it like cruise control this ability
to hide complexity and selectively
reveal it is the essence of
object-oriented programming and it's a
powerful and popular way to tackle
building large and complex programs
pretty much every piece of software on
your computer or game running on your
console was built using an
object-oriented programming language
like C++ C or objective c other popular
oo languages you may have heard of are
Python and Java it's important to
remember that code before being compiled
is just text as I mentioned earlier you
could write code in notepad or any old
word processor some people do but
generally today software developers use
special purpose applications for writing
programs ones that integrate many useful
tools for writing organizing compiling
and testing code because they've put
everything you need in one place they're
called integrated development
environments or Ides for shorts all Ides
provide a text editor for writing code
often with useful features like
automatic color coding to improve
readability many even check for syntax
errors as you type like spell check for
code big programs contain lots of
individual source files so ID allow
programmers to organize and efficiently
navigate everything also built right
into the IDE is the ability to compile
run code and if your program crashes
because it's still a work in progress
the IDE can take you back to the line of
code where it happened and often provide
you additional information to help you
track down and fix the bug which is a
process called debugging this is
important because most programmers spend
70 to 80% of their time testing and
debugging not writing new code good
tools contained in Ides can go a long
way when it comes to helping programmers
prevent and find errors many computer
programmers can be pretty loyal to their
idees though but let's be honest Vim is
where it's at providing you know how
equip in addition to coding and
debugging another important part of a
programmer's job is documenting their
code this can be done in Standalone
files called readmes which tell other
programmers to read that help file
before diving in it can also happen
writing the code itself with comments
these are specially marked statements
that the program knows to ignore when
the code is compiled they exist only to
help programmers figure out what's what
in the source code good documentation
helps programmers when they revisit code
they haven't seen for a while but it's
also crucial for programmers who are
totally new to it I just want to take a
second here and reiterate that it's the
worst when someone parachutes a load of
uncommented and undocumented code into
your lab and you literally have to go
line by line to understand what the code
is doing seriously don't be that person
documentation also promotes code reuse
so instead of having programmers
constantly write the same things over
and over they can track down someone
else's code that does what they need
then thanks to documentation they can
put it to work in their program without
ever having to read through the code
read the docs as they say in addition to
ID is another important piece of
software that helps big teams work
collaboratively on big coding projects
is called Source control also known as
Version Control or revision control most
often a big software company like apple
or Microsoft code for projects dist
stored on centralized servers called a
code repository when a programmer wants
to work on a piece of code they can
check it out sort of like checking out a
book from a library often this can be
done right in an IDE then they can edit
this code all they want on their
personal computer adding new features
and testing if they work when the
programmer is confident their changes
are working and there are no Lo ends
they can check the code back into the
repository known as committing code for
everyone else to use while a piece of
code is checked out and presumably
getting updated or modified other
programmers leave it alone this prevents
weird conflicts and duplicated work in
this way hundreds of programmers can be
simultaneously checking in and out
different pieces of code iteratively
building up huge systems critically you
don't want someone committing buggy code
because other people and teams May rely
on it their code could crash creating
confusion and lost time the master
version of the code stored on on the
server should always compile without
errors and run with minimal bugs but
sometimes bugs do creep in fortunately
Source Control software keeps track of
all changes and if a bug is found the
whole code or just a piece can be rolled
back to an earlier stable version it
also keeps track of who made each change
so co-workers can send nasty I mean
helpful and encouraging emails to the
offending person debugging goes hand
inhand with writing code and it's most
often done by an individual or small
team the big picture version of
debugging is quality assurance testing
or QA this is where team rigorously
tests out a piece of software attempting
to create unforeseen conditions that
might trip it up basically they elicit
bugs getting all the wrinkles out is a
huge effort but vital in making sure the
software works as intended for as many
users in as many situations as
imaginable before it ships you've
probably heard of beta software this is
a version of software that's mostly
complete but not 100% fully tested
companies will sometimes release beta
versions to the public to help them
identify issues it's essentially like
getting a free QA te what you don't hear
about as much is the version that comes
before the beta the Alpha version this
is usually so rough and buggy it's only
tested internally so that's the tip of
the iceberg in terms of the tools tricks
and techniques that allow software
Engineers to construct the huge pieces
of software that we know and love today
like YouTube Grand Theft Auto 5 and
PowerPoint as you might expect all those
millions of lines of code need some
serious processing power to run at
useful speeds so next episode we'll be
talking about how computers got so
incredibly fast see you then crash
course computer science is produced in
association with PBS digital Studios at
their Channel you can check out a
playlist of shows like physics go deep
look and PBS SpaceTime this episode was
filmed at the Chad and Stacy emal studio
in Indianapolis Indiana and it was made
with the help of all these nice people
and our wonderful Graphics team thought
Cafe that's where we're going to have to
Halt and Catch Fire see you next week
[Music]
la